[Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO]

Mercutio. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home to-night?1160
Benvolio. Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.
Mercutio. Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Benvolio. Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.1165
Mercutio. A challenge, on my life.
Benvolio. Romeo will answer it.
Mercutio. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Benvolio. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
dares, being dared.1170
Mercutio. Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a
white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a
love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
encounter Tybalt?1175
Benvolio. Why, what is Tybalt?
Mercutio. More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and
proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and1180
the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the
very first house, of the first and second cause:
ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the
hai!1185
Benvolio. The what?
Mercutio. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,1190
grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
bones, their bones!1195
[Enter ROMEO]

Benvolio. Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
Mercutio. Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a1200
kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to
be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy;
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey
eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation1205
to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
fairly last night.
Romeo. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Mercutio. The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?
Romeo. Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in1210
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Mercutio. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
constrains a man to bow in the hams.
Romeo. Meaning, to court'sy.
Mercutio. Thou hast most kindly hit it.1215
Romeo. A most courteous exposition.
Mercutio. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Romeo. Pink for flower.
Mercutio. Right.
Romeo. Why, then is my pump well flowered.1220
Mercutio. Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.
Romeo. O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.1225
Mercutio. Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.
Romeo. Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.
Mercutio. Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:1230
was I with you there for the goose?
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
not there for the goose.
Mercutio. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Romeo. Nay, good goose, bite not.1235
Mercutio. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.
Romeo. And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?
Mercutio. O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
inch narrow to an ell broad!1240
Romeo. I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Mercutio. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art
thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:1245
for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
Benvolio. Stop there, stop there.
Mercutio. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Benvolio. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.1250
Mercutio. O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short:
for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and
meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
Romeo. Here's goodly gear!
[Enter Nurse and PETER]

Mercutio. A sail, a sail!
Benvolio. Two, two; a shirt and a smock.
Nurse. Peter!
Peter. Anon!
Nurse. My fan, Peter.1260
Mercutio. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the
fairer face.
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Mercutio. God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.
Nurse. Is it good den?1265
Mercutio. 'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
dial is now upon the prick of noon.
Nurse. Out upon you! what a man are you!
Romeo. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
mar.1270
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,'
quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
may find the young Romeo?
Romeo. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
you have found him than he was when you sought him:1275
I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
Nurse. You say well.
Mercutio. Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
wisely, wisely.
Nurse. if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with1280
you.
Benvolio. She will indite him to some supper.
Mercutio. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!
Romeo. What hast thou found?
Mercutio. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,1285
that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
[Sings]
An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar,
Is very good meat in lent1290
But a hare that is hoar
Is too much for a score,
When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
to dinner, thither.1295
Romeo. I will follow you.
Mercutio. Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,
[Singing]
'lady, lady, lady.'
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO]

Nurse. Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?
Romeo. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
to in a month.1305
Nurse. An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such
Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by1310
too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
Peter. I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon
should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
good quarrel, and the law on my side.1315
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into1320
a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double
with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered
to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.1325
Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
protest unto thee—
Nurse. Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Romeo. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.1330
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Romeo. Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell1335
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
Nurse. No truly sir; not a penny.
Romeo. Go to; I say you shall.
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.
Romeo. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:1340
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:1345
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Romeo. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?1350
Romeo. I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
Nurse. Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady—Lord,
Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:—O, there
is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief1355
see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer
man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks
as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not
rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?1360
Romeo. Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.
Nurse. Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for
the—No; I know it begins with some other
letter:—and she hath the prettiest sententious of
it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good1365
to hear it.
Romeo. Commend me to thy lady.
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times.
[Exit Romeo]
Peter!1370
Peter. Anon!
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.
[Exeunt]