[Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, Page, and Servants]

Benvolio. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,1500
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Mercutio. Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
upon the table and says 'God send me no need of1505
thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Benvolio. Am I like such a fellow?
Mercutio. Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as1510
soon moody to be moved.
Benvolio. And what to?
Mercutio. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,1515
or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what
eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of1520
meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a
man for coughing in the street, because he hath
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing1525
his new doublet before Easter? with another, for
tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou
wilt tutor me from quarrelling!
Benvolio. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man
should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.1530
Mercutio. The fee-simple! O simple!
Benvolio. By my head, here come the Capulets.
Mercutio. By my heel, I care not.
[Enter TYBALT and others]

Tybalt. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.1535
Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.
Mercutio. And but one word with one of us? couple it with
something; make it a word and a blow.
Tybalt. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you
will give me occasion.1540
Mercutio. Could you not take some occasion without giving?
Tybalt. Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,—
Mercutio. Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall1545
make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!
Benvolio. We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.1550
Mercutio. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
[Enter ROMEO]

Tybalt. Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.
Mercutio. But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:1555
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'
Tybalt. Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
No better term than this,—thou art a villain.
Romeo. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee1560
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting: villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.
Tybalt. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.1565
Romeo. I do protest, I never injured thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
And so, good Capulet,—which name I tender
As dearly as my own,—be satisfied.1570
Mercutio. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Alla stoccata carries it away.
[Draws]
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?
Tybalt. What wouldst thou have with me?1575
Mercutio. Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your1580
ears ere it be out.
Tybalt. I am for you.
[Drawing]

Romeo. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Mercutio. Come, sir, your passado.1585
[They fight]

Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:1590
Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!
[TYBALT under ROMEO's arm stabs MERCUTIO, and flies with his followers]

Mercutio. I am hurt.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?1595
Benvolio. What, art thou hurt?
Mercutio. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
[Exit Page]

Romeo. Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.1600
Mercutio. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a1605
cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
was hurt under your arm.
Romeo. I thought all for the best.1610
Mercutio. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
And soundly too: your houses!
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO]

Romeo. This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
With Tybalt's slander,—Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,1620
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!
[Re-enter BENVOLIO]

Benvolio. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,1625
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Romeo. This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
This but begins the woe, others must end.
Benvolio. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Romeo. Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!1630
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
[Re-enter TYBALT]
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul1635
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.
Tybalt. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.1640
Romeo. This shall determine that.
[They fight; TYBALT falls]

Benvolio. Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,1645
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!
Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!
Benvolio. Why dost thou stay?
[Exit ROMEO]

[Enter Citizens, &c]

First Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
Benvolio. There lies that Tybalt.
First Citizen. Up, sir, go with me;
I charge thee in the princes name, obey.1655
[Enter Prince, attended; MONTAGUE, CAPULET, their]
Wives, and others]
Prince Escalus. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Benvolio. O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:1660
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Lady Capulet. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt
O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,1665
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!
Prince Escalus. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Benvolio. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink1670
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure: all this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts1675
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,1680
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than
his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm1685
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I1690
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
Lady Capulet. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:1695
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
Prince Escalus. Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;1700
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Montague. Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.
Prince Escalus. And for that offence1705
Immediately we do exile him hence:
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine:1710
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will:1715
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
[Exeunt]