Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals
No, for then we should be colliers
I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar
I strike quickly, being moved
But thou art not quickly moved to strike
A dog of the house of Montague moves me
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand: therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.   
A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the wall.
True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,     are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men
'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I     have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the maids, and cut off their heads.
The heads of the maids?
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads; take it in what sense thou wilt.   
They must take it in sense that feel it
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and 'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes     two of the house of the Montagues.
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee
How! turn thy back and run?
Fear me not
No, marry; I fear thee!   
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Nay, as they dare which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.      
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
I do bite my thumb, sir
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
  Is the law of our side, if I say     ay?
No
No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I bite my thumb, sir.
Do you quarrel, sir?   
Quarrel sir! no, sir
If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you
No better
Well, sir
Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen
Yes, better, sir
You lie
Draw, if you be men  
Part, fools! Put up your swords; you know not what you do.  
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?     Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.
I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword, Or manage it to part these men with me.
What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word, As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:     Have at thee, coward!  
Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!     Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!  
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,     And flourishes his blade in spite of me.  
Thou villain Capulet,aHold me not, let me go
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe  
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,a Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts, That quench the fire of your pernicious rage With purple fountains issuing from your veins,      On pain of torture, from those bloody hands Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground, And hear the sentence of your moved prince. Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,      Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets, And made Verona's ancient citizens Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments, To wield old partisans, in hands as old, Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:      If ever you disturb our streets again, Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. For this time, all the rest depart away: You Capulet; shall go along with me: And, Montague, come you this afternoon,      To know our further pleasure in this case, To old Free-town, our common judgment-place. Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.  
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?      Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Here were the servants of your adversary, And yours, close fighting ere I did approach: I drew to part them: in the instant came The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,      Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears, He swung about his head and cut the winds, Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn: While we were interchanging thrusts and blows, Came more and more and fought on part and part,      Till the prince came, who parted either part.
O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day? Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,      A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad; Where, underneath the grove of sycamore That westward rooteth from the city's side, So early walking did I see your son: Towards him I made, but he was ware of me      And stole into the covert of the wood: I, measuring his affections by my own, That most are busied when they're most alone, Pursued my humour not pursuing his, And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.    
Many a morning hath he there been seen, With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew. Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs; But all so soon as the all-cheering sun Should in the furthest east begin to draw      The shady curtains from Aurora's bed, Away from the light steals home my heavy son, And private in his chamber pens himself, Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out And makes himself an artificial night:      Black and portentous must this humour prove, Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
I neither know it nor can learn of him
Have you importuned him by any means?    
Both by myself and many other friends: But he, his own affections' counsellor, Is to himselfaI will not say how truea But to himself so secret and so close, So far from sounding and discovery,      As is the bud bit with an envious worm, Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air, Or dedicate his beauty to the sun. Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow. We would as willingly give cure as know.       
See, where he comes: so please you, step aside; I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay, To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.       
Good-morrow, cousin
Is the day so young?
But new struck nine
Ay me! sad hours seem long Was that my father that went hence so fast?
It was
Not having that, which, having, makes them short
In love?
Outa    
Of love?
Out of her favour, where I am in love
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view, Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,      Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will! Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here? Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all. Here's much to do with hate, but more with love. Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!      O any thing, of nothing first create! O heavy lightness! serious vanity! Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms! Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!      Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is! This love feel I, that feel no love in this. Dost thou not laugh?
No, coz, I rather weep
Good heart, at what?    
At thy good heart's oppression
Why, such is love's transgression Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown      Doth add more grief to too much of mine own. Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs; Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes; Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears: What is it else? a madness most discreet,      A choking gall and a preserving sweet. Farewell, my coz.
Soft! I will go along; An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;      This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Groan! why, no But sadly tell me who.    
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will: Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill! In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit; And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd, From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.      She will not stay the siege of loving terms, Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes, Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold: O, she is rich in beauty, only poor, That when she dies with beauty dies her store.    
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste, For beauty starved with her severity Cuts beauty off from all posterity. She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,      To merit bliss by making me despair: She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her
O, teach me how I should forget to think
By giving liberty unto thine eyes; Examine other beauties.
'Tis the way To call hers exquisite, in question more: These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows      Being black put us in mind they hide the fair; He that is strucken blind cannot forget The precious treasure of his eyesight lost: Show me a mistress that is passing fair, What doth her beauty serve, but as a note      Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair? Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.
But Montague is bound as well as I, In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think, For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Of honourable reckoning are you both; And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.      But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
But saying o'er what I have said before: My child is yet a stranger in the world; She hath not seen the change of fourteen years, Let two more summers wither in their pride,      Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Younger than she are happy mothers made
And too soon marr'd are those so early made The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she, She is the hopeful lady of my earth:      But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart, My will to her consent is but a part; An she agree, within her scope of choice Lies my consent and fair according voice. This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,      Whereto I have invited many a guest, Such as I love; and you, among the store, One more, most welcome, makes my number more. At my poor house look to behold this night Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:      Such comfort as do lusty young men feel When well-apparell'd April on the heel Of limping winter treads, even such delight Among fresh female buds shall you this night Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,      And like her most whose merit most shall be: Which on more view, of many mine being one May stand in number, though in reckoning none, Come, go with me.  
Find them out whose names are written here! It is written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are here      writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned.aIn good time.  
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning, One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;      Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning; One desperate grief cures with another's languish: Take thou some new infection to thy eye, And the rank poison of the old will die.
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that
For what, I pray thee?
For your broken shin
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is; Shut up in prison, kept without my food,      Whipp'd and tormented andaGod-den, good fellow.
God gi' god-den
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery
Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I pray, can you read any thing you see?    
Ay, if I know the letters and the language
Ye say honestly: rest you merry!
Stay, fellow; I can read   'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;      County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin      Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair assembly: whither should they come?
Up
Whither?
To supper; to our house
Whose house?
My master's
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before
Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house      of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry!  
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,      With all the admired beauties of Verona: Go thither; and, with unattainted eye, Compare her face with some that I shall show, And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
When the devout religion of mine eye      Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires; And these, who often drown'd could never die, Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars! One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.    
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by, Herself poised with herself in either eye: But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd Your lady's love against some other maid That I will show you shining at this feast,      And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
 
Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old, I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird! God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!  
How now! who calls?
Your mother
Madam, I am here What is your will?
This is the matter:aNurse, give leave awhile,      We must talk in secret:anurse, come back again; I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel. Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour
She's not fourteen
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,a And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but foura She is not fourteen. How long is it now To Lammas-tide?
A fortnight and odd days
Even or odd, of all days in the year, Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen. Susan and sheaGod rest all Christian souls!a Were of an age: well, Susan is with God; She was too good for me: but, as I said,      On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen; That shall she, marry; I remember it well. 'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years; And she was wean'd,aI never shall forget it,a Of all the days of the year, upon that day:      For I had then laid wormwood to my dug, Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall; My lord and you were then at Mantua:a Nay, I do bear a brain:abut, as I said, When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple      Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug! Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow, To bid me trudge: And since that time it is eleven years;      For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood, She could have run and waddled all about; For even the day before, she broke her brow: And then my husbandaGod be with his soul! A' was a merry manatook up the child:      'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit; Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame, The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.' To see, now, how a jest shall come about!      I warrant, an I should live a thousand years, I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he; And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'
Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace
Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,      To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.' And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone; A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly: 'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?      Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age; Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I
Peace, I have done Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:      An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet, How stands your disposition to be married?    
It is an honour that I dream not of
An honour! were not I thine only nurse, I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Well, think of marriage now; younger than you, Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,      Are made already mothers: by my count, I was your mother much upon these years That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief: The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
A man, young lady! lady, such a man      As all the worldawhy, he's a man of wax.
Verona's summer hath not such a flower
Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower
What say you? can you love the gentleman? This night you shall behold him at our feast;      Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face, And find delight writ there with beauty's pen; Examine every married lineament, And see how one another lends content And what obscured in this fair volume lies      Find written in the margent of his eyes. This precious book of love, this unbound lover, To beautify him, only lacks a cover: The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride For fair without the fair within to hide:      That book in many's eyes doth share the glory, That in gold clasps locks in the golden story; So shall you share all that he doth possess, By having him, making yourself no less.
No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
I'll look to like, if looking liking move: But no more deep will I endart mine eye Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.  
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.
We follow thee   Juliet, the county stays.
 
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? Or shall we on without a apology?
The date is out of such prolixity: We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,      Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath, Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper; Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke After the prompter, for our entrance: But let them measure us by what they will;      We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling; Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance
Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes      With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings, And soar with them above a common bound.
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft      To soar with his light feathers, and so bound, I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe: Under love's heavy burden do I sink.
And, to sink in it, should you burden love; Too great oppression for a tender thing.    
Is love a tender thing? it is too rough, Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love; Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down. Give me a case to put my visage in:      A visor for a visor! what care I What curious eye doth quote deformities? Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in, But every man betake him to his legs.    
A torch for me: let wantons light of heart Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels, For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase; I'll be a candle-holder, and look on. The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.    
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word: If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Nay, that's not so
I mean, sir, in delay We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day. Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
And we mean well in going to this mask;      But 'tis no wit to go.
Why, may one ask?
I dream'd a dream to-night
And so did I
Well, what was yours?    
That dreamers often lie
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes In shape no bigger than an agate-stone      On the fore-finger of an alderman, Drawn with a team of little atomies Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep; Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs, The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,      The traces of the smallest spider's web, The collars of the moonshine's watery beams, Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film, Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat, Not so big as a round little worm      Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid; Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers. And in this state she gallops night by night      Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love; O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight, O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees, O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream, Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,      Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are: Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose, And then dreams he of smelling out a suit; And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,      Then dreams, he of another benefice: Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck, And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades, Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon      Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes, And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two And sleeps again. This is that very Mab That plats the manes of horses in the night, And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,      Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes: This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, That presses them and learns them first to bear, Making them women of good carriage: This is shea    
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace! Thou talk'st of nothing.
True, I talk of dreams, Which are the children of an idle brain, Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,      Which is as thin of substance as the air And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes Even now the frozen bosom of the north, And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence, Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.    
This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves; Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
I fear, too early: for my mind misgives Some consequence yet hanging in the stars Shall bitterly begin his fearful date      With this night's revels and expire the term Of a despised life closed in my breast By some vile forfeit of untimely death. But He, that hath the steerage of my course, Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.    
Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!    
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.
Away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let      the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony, and Potpan!
Ay, boy, ready
You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.    
We cannot be here and there too brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.  
Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.      Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty, She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now? Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day That I have worn a visor and could tell      A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear, Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone: You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play. A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.        More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up, And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot. Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well. Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet; For you and I are past our dancing days:      How long is't now since last yourself and I Were in a mask?
By'r lady, thirty years
What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much: 'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,      Come pentecost as quickly as it will, Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.
'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir; His son is thirty.
Will you tell me that?      His son was but a ward two years ago.
  What lady is that, which doth enrich the hand Of yonder knight?
I know not, sir
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear; Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear! So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,      As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows. The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand, And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand. Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight! For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.    
This, by his voice, should be a Montague Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave Come hither, cover'd with an antic face, To fleer and scorn at our solemnity? Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,      To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.
Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe, A villain that is hither come in spite, To scorn at our solemnity this night.    
Young Romeo is it?
'Tis he, that villain Romeo
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone; He bears him like a portly gentleman; And, to say truth, Verona brags of him      To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth: I would not for the wealth of all the town Here in my house do him disparagement: Therefore be patient, take no note of him: It is my will, the which if thou respect,      Show a fair presence and put off these frowns, And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
It fits, when such a villain is a guest: I'll not endure him.
He shall be endured:      What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to; Am I the master here, or you? go to. You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul! You'll make a mutiny among my guests! You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!    
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame
Go to, go to; You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed? This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what: You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.      Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go: Be quiet, oraMore light, more light! For shame! I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.      I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.  
  If I profane with my unworthiest hand This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:      My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this; For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,      And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do; They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.    
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!      Give me my sin again.
You kiss by the book
Madam, your mother craves a word with you
What is her mother?
Marry, bachelor,      Her mother is the lady of the house, And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal; I tell you, he that can lay hold of her Shall have the chinks.    
Is she a Capulet? O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
Away, begone; the sport is at the best
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;      We have a trifling foolish banquet towards. Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night. More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed. Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:      I'll to my rest.  
Come hither, nurse
The son and heir of old Tiberio
What's he that now is going out of door?    
Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
I know not
Go ask his name: if he be married My grave is like to be my wedding bed.    
His name is Romeo, and a Montague; The only son of your great enemy.
My only love sprung from my only hate! Too early seen unknown, and known too late! Prodigious birth of love it is to me,      That I must love a loathed enemy.
What's this? what's this?
A rhyme I learn'd even now Of one I danced withal.  
 
Can I go forward when my heart is here? Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.  
Romeo! my cousin Romeo!    
He is wise; And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.
He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall: Call, good Mercutio.
Nay, I'll conjure too Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover! Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh: Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied; Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;' Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,      One nick-name for her purblind son and heir, Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim, When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid! He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not; The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.      I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes, By her high forehead and her scarlet lip, By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh And the demesnes that there adjacent lie, That in thy likeness thou appear to us!    
And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him
This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle Of some strange nature, letting it there stand Till she had laid it and conjured it down;      That were some spite: my invocation Is fair and honest, and in his mistress' name I conjure only but to raise up him.
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees, To be consorted with the humorous night:      Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark Now will he sit under a medlar tree, And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.      Romeo, that she were, O, that she were An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear! Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed; This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep: Come, shall we go?    
 
He jests at scars that never felt a wound   But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun. Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, Who is already sick and pale with grief,      That thou her maid art far more fair than she: Be not her maid, since she is envious; Her vestal livery is but sick and green And none but fools do wear it; cast it off. It is my lady, O, it is my love!      O, that she knew she were! She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that? Her eye discourses; I will answer it. I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks: Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,      Having some business, do entreat her eyes To twinkle in their spheres till they return. What if her eyes were there, they in her head? The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars, As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven      Would through the airy region stream so bright That birds would sing and think it were not night. See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand! O, that I were a glove upon that hand, That I might touch that cheek!    
Ay me!
She speaks: O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art As glorious to this night, being o'er my head As is a winged messenger of heaven      Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds And sails upon the bosom of the air.
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?      Deny thy father and refuse thy name; Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
  Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;      Thou art thyself, though not a Montague. What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot, Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part Belonging to a man. O, be some other name! What's in a name? that which we call a rose      By any other name would smell as sweet; So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd, Retain that dear perfection which he owes Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name, And for that name which is no part of thee      Take all myself.
I take thee at thy word: Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized; Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night      So stumblest on my counsel?
By a name I know not how to tell thee who I am: My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself, Because it is an enemy to thee;      Had I it written, I would tear the word.
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound: Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? The orchard walls are high and hard to climb, And the place death, considering who thou art, If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;      For stony limits cannot hold love out, And what love can do that dares love attempt; Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
If they do see thee, they will murder thee
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye      Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet, And I am proof against their enmity.
I would not for the world they saw thee here
I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight; And but thou love me, let them find me here:      My life were better ended by their hate, Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire; He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.      I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea, I would adventure for such merchandise.
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face, Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek      For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny What I have spoke: but farewell compliment! Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,' And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,      Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo, If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully: Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won, I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,      So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world. In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond, And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light: But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true Than those that have more cunning to be strange.      I should have been more strange, I must confess, But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware, My true love's passion: therefore pardon me, And not impute this yielding to light love, Which the dark night hath so discovered.    
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear That tips with silver all these fruit-tree topsa
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon, That monthly changes in her circled orb, Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.    
What shall I swear by?
Do not swear at all; Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self, Which is the god of my idolatry, And I'll believe thee.    
If my heart's dear lovea
Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee, I have no joy of this contract to-night: It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden; Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be      Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night! This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath, May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet. Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest Come to thy heart as that within my breast!    
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it: And yet I would it were to give again.    
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?
But to be frank, and give it thee again And yet I wish but for the thing I have: My bounty is as boundless as the sea, My love as deep; the more I give to thee,      The more I have, for both are infinite.  
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard Being in night, all this is but a dream, Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.  
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed If that thy bent of love be honourable, Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow, By one that I'll procure to come to thee, Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;       And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
  Madam!
I come, anon I do beseech theea     
  Madam!
By and by, I come:a To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief: To-morrow will I send.
So thrive my soula     
A thousand times good night!  
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from their books,       But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.  
Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice, To lure this tassel-gentle back again!       Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud; Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies, And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine, With repetition of my Romeo's name.
It is my soul that calls upon my name:       How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night, Like softest music to attending ears!
Romeo!
My dear?
At what o'clock to-morrow       Shall I send to thee?
At the hour of nine
I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Let me stand here till thou remember it
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there, Remembering how I love thy company.
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget, Forgetting any other home but this.
'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:       And yet no further than a wanton's bird; Who lets it hop a little from her hand, Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, And with a silk thread plucks it back again, So loving-jealous of his liberty.     
I would I were thy bird
Sweet, so would I: Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing. Good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow,       That I shall say good night till it be morrow.  
 
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night, Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,       And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels: Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye, The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry, I must up-fill this osier cage of ours       With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers. The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb; What is her burying grave that is her womb, And from her womb children of divers kind We sucking on her natural bosom find,       Many for many virtues excellent, None but for some and yet all different. O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities: For nought so vile that on the earth doth live       But to the earth some special good doth give, Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse: Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied; And vice sometimes by action dignified.       Within the infant rind of this small flower Poison hath residence and medicine power: For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part; Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart. Two such opposed kings encamp them still       In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will; And where the worser is predominant, Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.  
Good morrow, father
Benedicite! What early tongue so sweet saluteth me? Young son, it argues a distemper'd head So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed: Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,       And where care lodges, sleep will never lie; But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign: Therefore thy earliness doth me assure Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;       Or if not so, then here I hit it right, Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine
God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;       I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again I have been feasting with mine enemy, Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,       That's by me wounded: both our remedies Within thy help and holy physic lies: I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo, My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;       Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set On the fair daughter of rich Capulet: As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine; And all combined, save what thou must combine       By holy marriage: when and where and how We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow, I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray, That thou consent to marry us to-day.
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!       Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear, So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes. Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!       How much salt water thrown away in waste, To season love, that of it doth not taste! The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears; Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit       Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet: If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine, Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline: And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then, Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.     
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine
And bad'st me bury love
Not in a grave, To lay one in, another out to have.     
I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now Doth grace for grace and love for love allow; The other did not so.
O, she knew well Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.       But come, young waverer, come, go with me, In one respect I'll thy assistant be; For this alliance may so happy prove, To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste
 
Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home to-night?     
Not to his father's; I spoke with his man
Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet, Hath sent a letter to his father's house.     
A challenge, on my life
Romeo will answer it
Any man that can write may answer a letter
Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being dared.     
Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?     
Why, what is Tybalt?
More than prince of cats, I can tell you the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and       the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the very first house, of the first and second cause: ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the hai!     
The what?
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,       grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their bones, their bones!        
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo
Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a       kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy; Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation       to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
Good morrow to you both
The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in       such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.
Meaning, to court'sy
Thou hast most kindly hit it
A most courteous exposition
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy
Pink for flower
Right
Why, then is my pump well flowered
Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
    
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:       was I with you there for the goose?
Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast not there for the goose.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest
Nay, good goose, bite not
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?
O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!     
I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:       for this drivelling love is like a great natural, that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
Stop there, stop there
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short: for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
Here's goodly gear!  
A sail, a sail!
Two, two; a shirt and a smock
Peter!
Anon!
My fan, Peter
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen
God ye good den, fair gentlewoman
Is it good den?     
'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
Out upon you! what a man are you!
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
    
By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,' quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?
I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him:       I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
You say well
Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith; wisely, wisely.
if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with       you.
She will indite him to some supper
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!
What hast thou found?
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,       that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.   An old hare hoar, And an old hare hoar, Is very good meat in lent       But a hare that is hoar Is too much for a score, When it hoars ere it be spent. Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll to dinner, thither.     
I will follow you
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,  
Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.     
An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by       too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.     
Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word: and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself: but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into       a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.     
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress protest unto theea
Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much: Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Bid her devise Some means to come to shrift this afternoon; And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell       Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
No truly sir; not a penny
Go to; I say you shall
This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:       Within this hour my man shall be with thee And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair; Which to the high top-gallant of my joy Must be my convoy in the secret night. Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:       Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say, Two may keep counsel, putting one away?     
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel
Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest ladyaLord, Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:aO, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief       see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?     
Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R
Ah theaNo; I know it begins with some other letter:aand she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good       to hear it.
Commend me to thy lady
Ay, a thousand times   Peter!     
Anon!
 
The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;       In half an hour she promised to return. Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so. O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts, Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams, Driving back shadows over louring hills:       Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love, And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings. Now is the sun upon the highmost hill Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve Is three long hours, yet she is not come.       Had she affections and warm youthful blood, She would be as swift in motion as a ball; My words would bandy her to my sweet love, And his to me: But old folks, many feign as they were dead;       Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead. O God, she comes!   O honey nurse, what news? Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.     
Peter, stay at the gate  
Now, good sweet nurse,aO Lord, why look'st thou sad? Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily; If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news       By playing it to me with so sour a face.
I am a-weary, give me leave awhile: Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news: Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.     
Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile? Do you not see that I am out of breath?
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath To say to me that thou art out of breath? The excuse that thou dost make in this delay       Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that; Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance: Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not       how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand, and a foot, and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,       but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?
No, no: but all this did I know before What says he of our marriage? what of that?
Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!       It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. My back o' t' other side,aO, my back, my back! Beshrew your heart for sending me about, To catch my death with jaunting up and down!
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant, a virtuous,aWhere is your mother?
Where is my mother! why, she is within;       Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest! 'Your love says, like an honest gentleman, Where is your mother?'
O God's lady dear! Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;       Is this the poultice for my aching bones? Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?
Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
I have
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell; There stays a husband to make you a wife: Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks, They'll be in scarlet straight at any news. Hie you to church; I must another way,       To fetch a ladder, by the which your love Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark: I am the drudge and toil in your delight, But you shall bear the burden soon at night. Go; I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.     
 
So smile the heavens upon this holy act, That after hours with sorrow chide us not!     
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can, It cannot countervail the exchange of joy That one short minute gives me in her sight: Do thou but close our hands with holy words, Then love-devouring death do what he dare;       It is enough I may but call her mine.
These violent delights have violent ends And in their triumph die, like fire and powder, Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey Is loathsome in his own deliciousness       And in the taste confounds the appetite: Therefore love moderately; long love doth so; Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.   Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot       Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint: A lover may bestride the gossamer That idles in the wanton summer air, And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Good even to my ghostly confessor
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both
As much to him, else is his thanks too much
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath       This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue Unfold the imagined happiness that both Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words, Brags of his substance, not of ornament:       They are but beggars that can count their worth; But my true love is grown to such excess I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
 
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire: The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,       And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl; For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Thou art like one of those fellows that when he enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword upon the table and says 'God send me no need of       thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Am I like such a fellow?
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as       soon moody to be moved.
And what to?
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,       or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of       meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun: didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing       his new doublet before Easter? with another, for tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarrelling!
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.     
The fee-simple! O simple!
By my head, here come the Capulets
By my heel, I care not  
Follow me close, for I will speak to them Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.
And but one word with one of us? couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.     
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,a
Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall       make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!
We talk here in the public haunt of men: Either withdraw unto some private place, And reason coldly of your grievances, Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.     
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze; I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.  
Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:       Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower; Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford No better term than this,athou art a villain.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee       Doth much excuse the appertaining rage To such a greeting: villain am I none; Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.     
I do protest, I never injured thee, But love thee better than thou canst devise, Till thou shalt know the reason of my love: And so, good Capulet,awhich name I tender As dearly as my own,abe satisfied.     
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission! Alla stoccata carries it away.   Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?
What wouldst thou have with me?     
Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your       ears ere it be out.
I am for you  
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up
Come, sir, your passado  
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage! Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:       Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!  
I am hurt A plague o' both your houses! I am sped. Is he gone, and hath nothing?     
What, art thou hurt?
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.  
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much
No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o' both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a       cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
I thought all for the best
Help me into some house, Benvolio, Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses! They have made worms' meat of me: I have it, And soundly too: your houses!  
This gentleman, the prince's near ally, My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt In my behalf; my reputation stain'd With Tybalt's slander,aTybalt, that an hour Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,       Thy beauty hath made me effeminate And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!  
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead! That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,       Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
This day's black fate on more days doth depend; This but begins the woe, others must end.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!       Away to heaven, respective lenity, And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!   Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again, That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul       Is but a little way above our heads, Staying for thine to keep him company: Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here, Shalt with him hence.     
This shall determine that  
Romeo, away, be gone! The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain. Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,       If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!
O, I am fortune's fool!
Why dost thou stay?  
Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio? Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
There lies that Tybalt
Up, sir, go with me; I charge thee in the princes name, obey.        
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
O noble prince, I can discover all The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:       There lies the man, slain by young Romeo, That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child! O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,       For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague. O cousin, cousin!
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay; Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink       How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal Your high displeasure: all this uttered With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd, Could not take truce with the unruly spleen Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts       With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast, Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point, And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats Cold death aside, and with the other sends It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,       Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud, 'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than his tongue, His agile arm beats down their fatal points, And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm       An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled; But by and by comes back to Romeo, Who had but newly entertain'd revenge, And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I       Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain. And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly. This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
He is a kinsman to the Montague; Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:       Some twenty of them fought in this black strife, And all those twenty could but kill one life. I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give; Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;       Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend; His fault concludes but what the law should end, The life of Tybalt.
Enter JULIET]
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner       As Phaethon would whip you to the west, And bring in cloudy night immediately. Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night, That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.       Lovers can see to do their amorous rites By their own beauties; or, if love be blind, It best agrees with night. Come, civil night, Thou sober-suited matron, all in black, And learn me how to lose a winning match,       Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods: Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks, With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold, Think true love acted simple modesty. Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;       For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night Whiter than new snow on a raven's back. Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night, Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die, Take him and cut him out in little stars,       And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night And pay no worship to the garish sun. O, I have bought the mansion of a love, But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,       Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day As is the night before some festival To an impatient child that hath new robes And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse, And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks       But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.   Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Ay, ay, the cords  
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead! We are undone, lady, we are undone! Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!     
Can heaven be so envious?
Romeo can, Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo! Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?       This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell. Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,' And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice: I am not I, if there be such an I;       Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.' If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, no: Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,a God save the mark!ahere on his manly breast:       A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse; Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood, All in gore-blood; I swounded at the sight.
O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once! To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!       Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here; And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had! O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman! That ever I should live to see thee dead!     
What storm is this that blows so contrary? Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead? My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord? Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom! For who is living, if those two are gone?     
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished; Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
It did, it did; alas the day, it did!
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!       Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave? Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical! Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb! Despised substance of divinest show! Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,       A damned saint, an honourable villain! O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell, When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend In moral paradise of such sweet flesh? Was ever book containing such vile matter       So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell In such a gorgeous palace!
There's no trust, No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured, All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.       Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae: These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old. Shame come to Romeo!
Blister'd be thy tongue For such a wish! he was not born to shame:       Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit; For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd Sole monarch of the universal earth. O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?     
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband? Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name, When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it? But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:       Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring; Your tributary drops belong to woe, Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy. My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain; And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:       All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then? Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death, That murder'd me: I would forget it fain; But, O, it presses to my memory, Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:       'Tybalt is dead, and Romeoabanished;' That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,' Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death Was woe enough, if it had ended there: Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship       And needly will be rank'd with other griefs, Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,' Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both, Which modern lamentations might have moved? But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,       'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word, Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet, All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!' There is no end, no limit, measure, bound, In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.       Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse: Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent, When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.       Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled, Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled: He made you for a highway to my bed; But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed. Come, cords, come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;       And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo To comfort you: I wot well where he is. Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night: I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.     
 
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:       Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts, And thou art wedded to calamity.  
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom? What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,       That I yet know not?
Too familiar Is my dear son with such sour company: I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?     
A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips, Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;' For exile hath more terror in his look, Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'     
Hence from Verona art thou banished: Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
There is no world without Verona walls, But purgatory, torture, hell itself. Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,       And world's exile is death: then banished, Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment, Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe, And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!       Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince, Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law, And turn'd that black word death to banishment: This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,       Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog And little mouse, every unworthy thing, Live here in heaven and may look on her; But Romeo may not: more validity, More honourable state, more courtship lives       In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand And steal immortal blessing from her lips, Who even in pure and vestal modesty, Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;       But Romeo may not; he is banished: Flies may do this, but I from this must fly: They are free men, but I am banished. And say'st thou yet that exile is not death? Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,       No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean, But 'banished' to kill me?a'banished'? O friar, the damned use that word in hell; Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart, Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,       A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd, To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment
I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:       Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy, To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy! Unless philosophy can make a Juliet, Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,       It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.
O, then I see that madmen have no ears
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:       Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love, An hour but married, Tybalt murdered, Doting like me and like me banished, Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair, And fall upon the ground, as I do now,       Taking the measure of an unmade grave.  
Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself
Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans, Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.        
Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise; Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;   Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?
  Let me come in, and you shall know my errand;       I come from Lady Juliet.
Welcome, then  
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar, Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?     
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk
O, he is even in my mistress' case, Just in her case! O woful sympathy! Piteous predicament! Even so lies she, Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.       Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man: For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand; Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Nurse!
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her? Doth she not think me an old murderer, Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy With blood removed but little from her own? Where is she? and how doth she? and what says       My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps; And now falls on her bed; and then starts up, And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries, And then down falls again.     
As if that name, Shot from the deadly level of a gun, Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me, In what vile part of this anatomy       Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack The hateful mansion.  
Hold thy desperate hand: Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:       Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote The unreasonable fury of a beast: Unseemly woman in a seeming man! Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both! Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,       I thought thy disposition better temper'd. Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself? And stay thy lady too that lives in thee, By doing damned hate upon thyself? Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?       Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose. Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit; Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all, And usest none in that true use indeed       Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit: Thy noble shape is but a form of wax, Digressing from the valour of a man; Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;       Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love, Misshapen in the conduct of them both, Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask, Is set afire by thine own ignorance, And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.       What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive, For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead; There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee, But thou slew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too: The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend       And turns it to exile; there art thou happy: A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back; Happiness courts thee in her best array; But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench, Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:       Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable. Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed, Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her: But look thou stay not till the watch be set, For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;       Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back With twenty hundred thousand times more joy Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.       Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady; And bid her hasten all the house to bed, Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto: Romeo is coming.
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night       To hear good counsel: O, what learning is! My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir: Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.        
How well my comfort is revived by this!
Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state: Either be gone before the watch be set, Or by the break of day disguised from hence:       Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man, And he shall signify from time to time Every good hap to you that chances here: Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.
 
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily, That we have had no time to move our daughter:       Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly, And so did I:aWell, we were born to die. 'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night: I promise you, but for your company, I would have been a-bed an hour ago.     
These times of woe afford no time to woo Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.
I will, and know her mind early to-morrow; To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender       Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not. Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed; Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love; And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday nexta       But, soft! what day is this?
Monday, my lord,
Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon, O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her, She shall be married to this noble earl.       Will you be ready? do you like this haste? We'll keep no great ado,aa friend or two; For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late, It may be thought we held him carelessly, Being our kinsman, if we revel much:       Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends, And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow
Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,       Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day. Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho! Afore me! it is so very very late, That we may call it early by and by.
 
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day: It was the nightingale, and not the lark, That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;       Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree: Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn, No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:       Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops. I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I: It is some meteor that the sun exhales,       To be to thee this night a torch-bearer, And light thee on thy way to Mantua: Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death; I am content, so thou wilt have it so.       I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye, 'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow; Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat The vaulty heaven so high above our heads: I have more care to stay than will to go:       Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so. How is't, my soul? let's talk; it is not day.
It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away! It is the lark that sings so out of tune, Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.       Some say the lark makes sweet division; This doth not so, for she divideth us: Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes, O, now I would they had changed voices too! Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,       Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day, O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.
More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!  
Madam!     
Nurse?
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber: The day is broke; be wary, look about.  
Then, window, let day in, and let life out
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend  
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend! I must hear from thee every day in the hour, For in a minute there are many days:       O, by this count I shall be much in years Ere I again behold my Romeo!
Farewell! I will omit no opportunity That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.     
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve For sweet discourses in our time to come.
O God, I have an ill-divining soul! Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,       As one dead in the bottom of a tomb: Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you: Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!  
O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle: If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him. That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune; For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long, But send him back.     
  Ho, daughter! are you up?
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother? Is she not down so late, or up so early? What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?  
Why, how now, Juliet!
Madam, I am not well
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death? What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears? An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;       Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love; But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend Which you weep for.     
Feeling so the loss, Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death, As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
What villain madam?     
That same villain, Romeo
  Villain and he be many miles asunder God Pardon him! I do, with all my heart; And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
That is, because the traitor murderer lives
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands: Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not: Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua, Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,       Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram, That he shall soon keep Tybalt company: And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied With Romeo, till I behold himadeada       Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd. Madam, if you could find out but a man To bear a poison, I would temper it; That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof, Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors       To hear him named, and cannot come to him. To wreak the love I bore my cousin Upon his body that slaughter'd him!
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.     
And joy comes well in such a needy time: What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child; One who, to put thee from thy heaviness, Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,       That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for.
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn, The gallant, young and noble gentleman, The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,       Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too, He shall not make me there a joyful bride. I wonder at this haste; that I must wed Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.       I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam, I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear, It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate, Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,       And see how he will take it at your hands.  
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew; But for the sunset of my brother's son It rains downright.       How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears? Evermore showering? In one little body Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind; For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea, Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,       Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs; Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them, Without a sudden calm, will overset Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife! Have you deliver'd to her our decree?     
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks I would the fool were married to her grave!
Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks? Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,       Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have: Proud can I never be of what I hate; But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.     
How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this? 'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;' And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you, Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds, But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,       To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church, Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither. Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage! You tallow-face!
Fie, fie! what, are you mad?     
Good father, I beseech you on my knees, Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch! I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday, Or never after look me in the face:       Speak not, reply not, do not answer me; My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest That God had lent us but this only child; But now I see this one is one too much, And that we have a curse in having her:       Out on her, hilding!
God in heaven bless her! You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue, Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.     
I speak no treason
O, God ye god-den
May not one speak?
Peace, you mumbling fool! Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;       For here we need it not.
You are too hot
God's bread! it makes me mad: Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play, Alone, in company, still my care hath been       To have her match'd: and having now provided A gentleman of noble parentage, Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd, Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts, Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;       And then to have a wretched puling fool, A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender, To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love, I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.' But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:       Graze where you will you shall not house with me: Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest. Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise: An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend; And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in       the streets, For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee, Nor what is mine shall never do thee good: Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.  
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds, That sees into the bottom of my grief? O, sweet my mother, cast me not away! Delay this marriage for a month, a week; Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed       In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word: Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.  
O God!aO nurse, how shall this be prevented?       My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven; How shall that faith return again to earth, Unless that husband send it me from heaven By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me. Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems       Upon so soft a subject as myself! What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy? Some comfort, nurse.
Faith, here it is Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing,       That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you; Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth. Then, since the case so stands as now it doth, I think it best you married with the county. O, he's a lovely gentleman!       Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam, Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart, I think you are happy in this second match, For it excels your first: or if it did not,       Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were, As living here and you no use of him.
Speakest thou from thy heart?
And from my soul too; Or else beshrew them both.     
Amen!
What?
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much Go in: and tell my lady I am gone, Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,       To make confession and to be absolved.
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done  
